In this video,
we're going to take
some time to understand
how dates work in Excel,
and to get to know a few of
the more common date functions.
The first thing we need
to understand about
dates in Excel is
that they are just,
in fact, numbers formatted
to look like dates.
Let's have a look at an example.
I'm going to click
into D2 and I'm
going to type the number
1 and press "Enter",
and well, I get the number 1.
But what I would like you
to notice is in the number
formatting section the
format is set to general.
That basically means no
format has been applied.
If I click the dropdown and
change that to short date,
it changes to the
1st of January 1900.
Interesting. If I now
type the number 2,
now remembering that this is
now formatted to be a date,
and press "Enter", I get
the 2nd of January 1900.
So you get the idea,
dates are just the number of days
since the 1st of January 1900.
This has two very
large implications.
The first is, we
now understand why
our date sometimes
come up as numbers,
and our numbers sometimes
come up as dates,
and to fix the
problem is very easy.
All we need to do is come back to
our number format and switch it
back to the format
you actually want.
More importantly
however, it means we
can perform arithmetic
operations with dates,
and this is where it gets
much more interesting.
So I'm just going to delete this,
and we're going to click into B2.
Now, very often, before we can
perform any calculations
with dates,
we need to know what
the current date is.
So if I were to work
out how old somebody
was or how overdue
an invoice was,
I have to have a reference point,
but obviously, that
reference point
is going to change tomorrow.
So I need some way of Excel
automatically working
out what the date is,
and there are two functions
that can help us with this.
I'm going to ask you,
please click on the
Formulas tool bar,
and the first group is
our function library.
Now, this is great because it has
a list of all the
Excel functions.
So if you have
forgotten what they're
called or you want to see
what else is available,
you can always come back
here and have a look.
If we have a look at the
Text functions, for example,
you can see all
the text functions
we worked with last week,
as well as a few additional ones
you might want to investigate.
This week, we're looking
at date functions.
I'm going to come
to date and time,
and again, you'll see
quite a rich selection
available for us.
Now, the two functions
that will help us work out
today's date are
the NOW function.
If I hover over there,
you'll see it returns
the current date and
time formatted as date and time.
So that will give us
the date and time.
If you just want the date,
then you're better off
using the TODAY function,
and that's the one we're
going to click on.
So let's click on "Today",
and a little message box
appears telling us
that this is volatile.
There are a few Excel
functions that are volatile.
All it means is that when
there is a change
in the workbook,
this function will recalculate.
If you have millions
of this function,
that could cause
performance overhead.
But as we never need
more than one day
function in a workbook,
it's not a problem at all.
So you can just press
"Enter" or click "Okay",
and there's today's date.
Obviously, if you're
working alongside me,
you won't have got the
exact same date as mine,
you would have got whatever
the date is where
you are right now.
So just to recap,
the NOW function returns
the date and time,
the TODAY function
returns today's date.
When I open up this
workbook tomorrow,
it will actually have
tomorrow's date.
Last week we also had a look at
functions for separating text.
However, we can't use
those same functions for
separating out our dates.
So if I want to just extract
the day or just the year,
the LEFT and the RIGHT functions
are not going to help me because,
actually, this is just a number.
Excel provided us with
three date functions specifically
for separating our dates.
If we come back to our
Date & Time functions,
you'll see we have
DAY, MONTH, and YEAR,
and these basically perform
a similar function
to the LEFT, RIGHT
and MID functions, but
they extract the day,
the month or the
year as a number.
Let's see how this work.
So I'm going to come into L5,
and I'm going to type
"=DAY" and Tab.
Now, the argument
it needs is a date.
It says serial number which
is a little confusing,
but we now know that dates
are, in fact, numbers.
So we're going to
click on Invoice Date
and press "Enter",
and you can see what's
returned: the second.
If I double-click,
copy that down,
I can now see the day on
which I was invoiced.
Now very similar, and
I'll just do them in
their cells to the right to
demonstrate you have
your month function.
This will return
the month number.
So I'm expecting a three here,
I'm just going to press "Tab",
and you can see that as
my MONTH number and the YEAR
work very much the same way.
So "=year", click
on my "Invoice Date",
press "Enter", and
there's my 2020.
So three functions which allow
us to separate out dates;
DAY, MONTH and YEAR.
In the next video,
we're going to look
at how we perform
the reverse of this
operation and given a day,
month, and a year
create a valid date.